README.md, before:

# Datahike JDBC Backend

<p align="center">
<a href="https://clojurians.slack.com/archives/CB7GJAN0L"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/clojurians%20slack-join%20channel-blueviolet"/></a>
<a href="https://clojars.org/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc"> <img src="https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc.svg" /></a>
<a href="https://circleci.com/gh/replikativ/datahike-jdbc"><img src="https://circleci.com/gh/replikativ/datahike-jdbc.svg?style=shield"/></a>
<a href="https://github.com/replikativ/datahike-jdbc/tree/development"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/replikativ/datahike-jdbc/development"/></a>
<a href="https://versions.deps.co/replikativ/datahike-jdbc" title="Dependencies Status"><img src="https://versions.deps.co/replikativ/datahike-jdbc/status.svg" /></a>
</p>

The goal of this backend is to support all JDBC backends in one with no penalty in performance.
Since there are plenty of databases to support and JDBC gives us a sufficient interface to a
lot of them we chose to use JDBC as a backend instead of implementing them one by one. Another
goal is that this backend supersedes [datahike-postgres](https://github.com/replikativ/datahike-postgres/).

## Migrate from datahike-postgres to datahike-jdbc
The migration should be seamless. First you update the dependencies from `datahike-postgres` to
`datahike-jdbc`. Then you adapt the configuration as follows.

## Configuration
Please read the [Datahike configuration docs](https://github.com/replikativ/datahike/blob/master/doc/config.md) on how to configure your backend. A sample configuration for PostgreSQL for passing as parameter to e.g.
`create-database`, `connect` and `delete-database`:
```clojure
{:store {:backend :jdbc
         :dbtype "postgresql"
         :user "datahike"
         :password "datahike"
         :dbname "datahike"}}
```
This same configuration can be achieved by setting one environment variable for the jdbc backend
and one environment variable for the configuration of the jdbc backend:
```bash
DATAHIKE_STORE_BACKEND=jdbc
DATAHIKE_STORE_CONFIG='{:dbtype "postgresql" :user "datahike" :password "datahike" :dbname "datahike"}'
```

## Prerequisites
For this backend to work you need to choose a database that is supported by JDBC. Please have a
look at the docs for [clojure.java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc/). For the sake
of comparability we will choose Postgres here.

For this manual to work you need to have a PostgreSQL server running and be able to connect to
it from your machine. There are several ways to run PostgreSQL but the easiest might be to use
a container. Please find a [manual on how to run PostgreSQL](https://hub.docker.com/_/postgres) in a container on dockerhub.

On your local machine your setup prerequisites could look something like this:
1. [Running Docker locally](https://docs.docker.com/engine/)
2. A running instance of PostgreSQL that you can connect to.
3. [A JDK to run your Clojure on](https://clojure.org/guides/getting_started)
4. [Leiningen, Boot or Clojure CLI to run your code or a REPL](https://leiningen.org/#install)

We will stick with Leiningen for this manual. If you want to use MySQL or H2 for a try, please
have a look into the tests to see how to configure these backend stores.

## Usage
Add to your Leiningen or Boot dependencies:
[![Clojars Project](https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc.svg)](https://clojars.org/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc)

Now require the Datahike API and the datahike-jdbc namespace in your editor or REPL using the
keyword ~:jdbc~. If you want to use other backends than JDBC please refer to the official
[Datahike docs](https://github.com/replikativ/datahike/blob/master/doc/config.md).

### Run PostgreSQL on Docker
```bash
  docker run --detach --publish 5432:5432 --env POSTGRES_DB=config-test --env POSTGRES_USER=alice --env POSTGRES_PASSWORD=foo postgres:alpine
```

### Run Datahike in your REPL
```clojure
  (ns project.core
    (:require [datahike.api :as d]
              [datahike-jdbc.core])

  ;; This configuration suits the config of the container started above.
  ;; In case you run your PostgreSQL instance with other settings, please
  ;; adjust this configuration
  (def cfg {:store {:backend :jdbc
                    :dbtype "postgresql"
                    :host "localhost"
                    :port 5432
                    :user "alice"
                    :password "foo"
                    :dbname "config-test"}})

  ;; Create a database at this place, by default configuration we have a strict
  ;; schema validation and keep historical data
  (d/create-database cfg)

  (def conn (d/connect cfg))

  ;; The first transaction will be the schema we are using:
  (d/transact conn [{:db/ident :name
                     :db/valueType :db.type/string
                     :db/cardinality :db.cardinality/one }
                    {:db/ident :age
                     :db/valueType :db.type/long
                     :db/cardinality :db.cardinality/one }])

  ;; Let's add some data and wait for the transaction
  (d/transact conn [{:name  "Alice", :age   20 }
                    {:name  "Bob", :age   30 }
                    {:name  "Charlie", :age   40 }
                    {:age 15 }])

  ;; Search the data
  (d/q '[:find ?e ?n ?a
         :where
         [?e :name ?n]
         [?e :age ?a]]
    @conn)
  ;; => #{[3 "Alice" 20] [4 "Bob" 30] [5 "Charlie" 40]}

  ;; Clean up the database if it is not needed any more
  (d/delete-database cfg)
```

## Run Tests

```bash
  bash -x ./bin/run-integration-tests
```

## License

Copyright © 2020 lambdaforge UG (haftungsbeschränkt)

This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the terms of the Eclipse Public License 1.0.

Commit message:

Add jdbcUrl as configuration parameter
next.jdbc can take urls via :jdbcUrl to configure your connection.
For that to work it was necessary to make dbtype optional as
configuration parameter and add jdbcUrl as optional configuration
parameter. Now it is possible to pass the configuration partially
as url and as key-value-pairs to configure the connection.

- Closes #8
- Updated README
- New CircleCI step for integrationtesting with postgresql and
  mariadb

README.md, after:

# Datahike JDBC Backend

<p align="center">
<a href="https://clojurians.slack.com/archives/CB7GJAN0L"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/clojurians%20slack-join%20channel-blueviolet"/></a>
<a href="https://clojars.org/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc"> <img src="https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc.svg" /></a>
<a href="https://circleci.com/gh/replikativ/datahike-jdbc"><img src="https://circleci.com/gh/replikativ/datahike-jdbc.svg?style=shield"/></a>
<a href="https://github.com/replikativ/datahike-jdbc/tree/development"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/replikativ/datahike-jdbc/development"/></a>
<a href="https://versions.deps.co/replikativ/datahike-jdbc" title="Dependencies Status"><img src="https://versions.deps.co/replikativ/datahike-jdbc/status.svg" /></a>
</p>

The goal of this backend is to support all JDBC backends in one with no penalty in performance.
Since there are plenty of databases to support and JDBC gives us a sufficient interface to a
lot of them we chose to use JDBC as a backend instead of implementing them one by one. Another
goal is that this backend supersedes [datahike-postgres](https://github.com/replikativ/datahike-postgres/).

## Migrate from datahike-postgres to datahike-jdbc
The migration should be seamless. First you update the dependencies from `datahike-postgres` to
`datahike-jdbc`. Then you adapt the configuration as follows.

## Configuration
Please read the [Datahike configuration docs](https://github.com/replikativ/datahike/blob/master/doc/config.md) on how to configure your backend. A sample configuration for PostgreSQL for passing as parameter to e.g.
`create-database`, `connect` and `delete-database`:
```clojure
{:store {:backend :jdbc
         :dbtype "postgresql"
         :user "datahike"
         :password "datahike"
         :dbname "datahike"}}
```
This same configuration can be achieved by setting one environment variable for the jdbc backend
and one environment variable for the configuration of the jdbc backend:
```bash
DATAHIKE_STORE_BACKEND=jdbc
DATAHIKE_STORE_CONFIG='{:dbtype "postgresql" :user "datahike" :password "datahike" :dbname "datahike"}'
```

It is also possible to pass a configuration url via `:jdbcUrl` like it is mentioned in the underlying library [next.jdbc](https://cljdoc.org/d/seancorfield/next.jdbc/1.0.462/doc/getting-started#the-db-spec-hash-map). The Url can pass additional arguments in the query part or you can combine the url with arguments passed as key-value-pairs.

Arguments not mentioned will be passed downstream to the corresponding jdbc-driver so every configuration option available should be working.

## Prerequisites
For this backend to work you need to choose a database that is supported by JDBC. Please have a
look at the docs for [clojure.java.jdbc](https://github.com/clojure/java.jdbc/). For the sake
of comparability we will choose Postgres here.

For this manual to work you need to have a PostgreSQL server running and be able to connect to
it from your machine. There are several ways to run PostgreSQL but the easiest might be to use
a container. Please find a [manual on how to run PostgreSQL](https://hub.docker.com/_/postgres) in a container on dockerhub.

On your local machine your setup prerequisites could look something like this:
1. [Running Docker locally](https://docs.docker.com/engine/)
2. A running instance of PostgreSQL that you can connect to.
3. [A JDK to run your Clojure on](https://clojure.org/guides/getting_started)
4. [Leiningen, Boot or Clojure CLI to run your code or a REPL](https://leiningen.org/#install)

We will stick with Leiningen for this manual. If you want to use MySQL or H2 for a try, please
have a look into the tests to see how to configure these backend stores.

## Usage
Add to your Leiningen or Boot dependencies:
[![Clojars Project](https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc.svg)](https://clojars.org/io.replikativ/datahike-jdbc)

Now require the Datahike API and the datahike-jdbc namespace in your editor or REPL using the
keyword ~:jdbc~. If you want to use other backends than JDBC please refer to the official
[Datahike docs](https://github.com/replikativ/datahike/blob/master/doc/config.md).

### Run PostgreSQL on Docker
```bash
  docker run --detach --publish 5432:5432 --env POSTGRES_DB=config-test --env POSTGRES_USER=alice --env POSTGRES_PASSWORD=foo postgres:alpine
```

### Run Datahike in your REPL
```clojure
  (ns project.core
    (:require [datahike.api :as d]
              [datahike-jdbc.core])

  ;; This configuration suits the config of the container started above.
  ;; In case you run your PostgreSQL instance with other settings, please
  ;; adjust this configuration
  (def cfg {:store {:backend :jdbc
                    :dbtype "postgresql"
                    :host "localhost"
                    :port 5432
                    :user "alice"
                    :password "foo"
                    :dbname "config-test"}})

  ;; Create a database at this place, by default configuration we have a strict
  ;; schema validation and keep historical data
  (d/create-database cfg)

  (def conn (d/connect cfg))

  ;; The first transaction will be the schema we are using:
  (d/transact conn [{:db/ident :name
                     :db/valueType :db.type/string
                     :db/cardinality :db.cardinality/one }
                    {:db/ident :age
                     :db/valueType :db.type/long
                     :db/cardinality :db.cardinality/one }])

  ;; Let's add some data and wait for the transaction
  (d/transact conn [{:name  "Alice", :age   20 }
                    {:name  "Bob", :age   30 }
                    {:name  "Charlie", :age   40 }
                    {:age 15 }])

  ;; Search the data
  (d/q '[:find ?e ?n ?a
         :where
         [?e :name ?n]
         [?e :age ?a]]
    @conn)
  ;; => #{[3 "Alice" 20] [4 "Bob" 30] [5 "Charlie" 40]}

  ;; Clean up the database if it is not needed any more
  (d/delete-database cfg)
```

## Run Tests

```bash
  bash -x ./bin/run-integration-tests
```

## License

Copyright © 2020 lambdaforge UG (haftungsbeschränkt)

This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the terms of the Eclipse Public License 1.0.
